"Hello and welcome to another episode of no such thing as a fish, a weekly podcast coming
to you from the QI offices in Covert Garden.
My name is Dan Schreiber and I'm sitting here with Anitz Zitsky, Andrew Hunter Murray and
James Harkin and once again we have gathered around the microphones with our four favorite
facts from the last seven days and in no particular order here we go starting with you, James."
Okay, my fact this week is that there is a special language in Papu New Guinea that is only used
when gathering nuts. It's very weird. So can you only use it when gathering nuts?
Actually picking the nut or when you're on your way to pick the nut or when you...
In the general nut picking area. So if you try and use it outside the area where the trees are
then there's a worry that mountain spirits might come down and investigate and then cause problems
with the nuts. And basically this is a taboo language, this is relatively common around the world
and you change your language whenever you're doing anything as a superstition and eventually it becomes
an actual language or an actual vocabulary of more than a thousand words in this case.
And what's the idea that the spirits will steal the nuts from you? What's the fear here?
So some some normal words that you might use like say I don't know I'm making these up but like
wither or dry or dead or whatever they might be bad for the plants they might be unhealthy for the
plants and so you have to use alternative words that wouldn't be generally unhealthy to the plants.
And is this if you were going to be part of the nut gathering unit would you have to study
this language or does everyone know this language? That's a really good point I don't know but I
imagine they teach it to you is probably not the first thing you learn. It's probably more like a
second language. Yeah I think. So it's really weird there seem to be two different kinds of belief.
One is that there's a spirit called keto made who can rip people apart but that's only one
group of people that's only one social group because there are loads of different groups all over
New Guinea and lots of them gather the nuts and they travel in from the coast to the mountains to
get to the nut area and the other is that as you say that if you talk about wet things then all
the nuts you find will be really wet and if you use words like empty or bitter same deal but it's
too complete separate beliefs about why you have to use this language it's wet. So then you have a
euphemism for empty or bitter or wet but then that starts to mean that so then surely that
becomes bad luck and then you've got to make a new one right. So this is a thing called
perjuration and it happens in English as well so for example the word for the toilet in the 15th
century was privy and then that was replaced by a euphemism but then which was it was raised by bog house
which I didn't know that was the polite way you'd say it instead of privy because privy was rude
and then toilet but then toilet becomes rude so then lavatory and now in America it's restroom
but as soon as people really associate restroom as soon as that becomes the rude word they'll have
to think of another even more remote. So what is it in Britain then? I think bathroom people say
bathroom to be polite don't they? Yeah but it will move on should we make a new one quickly now?
Can we not go back to bog house? Yeah the privy oh sorry the bog house
Only when you're around the queen. In a similar vein our word for bear in the middle ages
was taboo because so it probably came from ursus so you know obviously you have some
ursumager and stuff and that's the Latin for bear but because bears were big scary things it was
thought to bring bear rage upon you if you said their name so people would refer to them as
the brown one or the shaggy one and so the word for bear comes from the word for brown it's like
bro and in china you can't say the word tiger in some places so if you're speaking about a
man-eating tiger you'll use a different word often referred to as big insect.
There's a massive insect down the road. I think you'd be more terrified if someone said there's
a large insect behind you and you turned around and it was a tiger. I would say just give them
the warning straight out so it's to prevent it from coming into the village so you don't if there's
a tiger behind you you probably say tiger but it's if you say big insect then it won't hear
its name and it won't come down oh yeah so it won't know it's been summoned so you'll get summoned
instead loads of big insects yes at least there's no such insects yeah. In Papua New Guinea so this
language even though this is language purely for picking up nuts the diversity of language in Papua
New Guinea is extraordinary I think it's the highest diversity in the world so they have over 800
languages, 850 languages and they have so much this is what's crazy population versus the amount
of languages that they have there's this thing called the greenberg greenberg's diversity index
which charts how much diversity language is in per country it says Papua New Guinea holds the top
spot it is so diverse there that the probability of two random people selected in the country any two
random people if they were brought to each other to talk to each other there's a 98.8% chance that
they won't speak the same language. Isn't that crazy? That's a bad speed dating day. Yeah so how do
you have courts and things like that how do you have schools? They must have a national language of
let's say English yeah yeah exactly they've got they've actually got four official languages in
Papua New Guinea the fourth being sign language as the official language but that's exactly what it is
everyone speaks a main language and then these are all other languages that are slowly going
extinct and one or two speakers left. Yeah because they've got English that's very widely spoken
there and then they've got Taco Pisin haven't they which is Pigeon talk so just Pigeon English which
is great and I just love all kinds of Pigeon English or kind of Creole when you read them because
it's such a funny warping of what we say so the word for broken in Taco Pisin is Bagarapim which
is Bagarap from Bagarap that's what you know now say broken um MT tin is a person who talks nonsense
you know like an empty person like an empty vessel an empty vessel exactly Sue Sock man is a
sophisticated person why James might know this oh James you always wear Sock Socks is that it?
you always say there's a phrase that you used to say when you're growing up to say that someone's
bit well to do oh look at you with your matching shoes same thing Sue Sock man means
person with shoes and socks oh look at you look at you we have matching shoes here you go you fit
right in I didn't know that Papi New Guinea is the second largest island in the world I didn't
know that either it depends what you count as an island of course it's very true yeah if you count
Eurasia as an island fuck down to three but sorry it doesn't include Australia it doesn't
it looks great yeah after I think it's after Greenland yeah it's um the country is called Papi New Guinea
the whole island is called New Guinea but the western half of it which is part of Indonesia
is Papua and West Papua well yeah and then you also have Guinea and Guinea Bissell right and Guiana
yeah absolutely Germany I have mixed up
I looked up a couple more taboos oh yeah so this is an interesting one there's an Ethiopian language
called Cambata and it's got marital linguistic taboos that's quite common isn't it yeah so a woman
can't use some married women follow the system which is called Balecia and it means that they are not
allowed to use words that begin with the same syllable as your father-in-law's name or your mother-in-law's
name so so my mother-in-law is called Natalia so you wouldn't be able to talk about Natajek Toads
you wouldn't be able to talk about Natajek Toads at all you'd have nothing to say yeah
you'd have to coin a completely different word for them I just call them Toads Toads yeah yeah
so it's not a problem for James which is great what what um what syllable would you not be allowed to
use um liel liel so you wouldn't be able to talk about the northern french city right
where is this yoro star going to oh you'll see when we got there
yeah that's really cool well there's another kind of gender-based specific language I was looking at
in Nigeria actually so I guess the thing you're talking about as a language specific to one thing
yeah and this is a language in the uban community in Nigeria and they have different languages for men
and women and they say they think they're the only tribe in the world who has this that would be
even worse for speed dating wouldn't they I don't know how it works and it's also bizarre because
when people are born then you get raised by your mother and your sisters and generally women
so everyone speaks the women's language but then apparently there was an interview with one of
the tribal leaders who said that as boys start reaching adolescence they just start speaking the
male language and it's completely different I mean the words are utterly different and he's like
if boys don't start speaking the male language then we consider them a bit abnormal so it was a
kick what a rough adolescence is that you're like shit I've got to sort of memorize secretly this
language I'm supposed to miraculously start speaking we talk about toxic masculinity in this country
don't we but yeah that is pretty bad you know sometimes when you're at a restaurant and you see a
couple who just don't speak to each other the whole meal yeah I presume every restaurant is like that
relationships are constantly awkward so the so the meals can still speak the yeah they can understand
each other they're just not allowed to speak each other's language anymore no I was reading about
a secret language that was used in wartime in Canada and it was very cleverly done because it was
it's a secret language in that not many people spoke it so they were in the Canadian army they enlisted
these Native North Americans and they were they spoke Cree and Cree was a language that barely
anyone speaks it's only these these people and so what they used to do is in between battalions they
would have Cree speakers and any messages that they needed to send across it was those people who
took it so if they were caught there was no way of getting the information out of them because
the language barrier was so great so yeah but the problem was is that Cree didn't have words for the
things that they needed to get across so things like they had you know tanks machine guns and bombers
so a machine gun they had to translate into their language which is little gun that shoots fast
or a fighter bomber would be the Cree word for mosquito because that was the that was the best way
of explaining it so yeah they had to invent new words and new phrases in order to do this so cool
that's interesting because there were planes called mosquitoes weren't there that's right yeah yeah
yeah yeah one of those but they the ones that were slightly made of wood yes they were I'm pretty
sure that was my thing I think yes or partly wouldn't frame that's very cool I have some stuff on
gathering nuts oh right so don't go gathering hazel nuts on September the 21st in Birmingham why
because that is devil's nutting day apparently according to an old folklore satan comes out at that
time and he collects his nuts on September the 21st so you leave it for him to do and where's
this Birmingham it's in the West Midlands basically and there's an old saying of something being dirty
in Birmingham you would say it's the colour of the devil's nutting bag
you're ever in Birmingham a bit of locals like for you to use yeah that's going to go down like an
absolute charm coolest kid of the party just on nut gathering it's quite dangerous sometimes
isn't it so if you're gathering big nuts then they can fall on you and that is a genuine
dang coconut I picture nuts on the ground as opposed to in the tree so no sorry yeah from
the tree okay coconut obviously it's not like you're just crawling on the ground you keep bumping
into nuts but I like the so gathering Brazil nuts then foragers wear hats and they don't collect
the more windy days and stuff like that but I didn't realize that they when they fall out of trees
they fall from so high that they'll bury themselves 30 centimetres into the ground so when you're not
gathering for Brazil nuts then you're digging up the ground yeah the nut inside isn't that weird
because they're quite spiky are they Brazil nuts they are on the outside yeah so trekking
they're made like that so that they because it's quite clever if you're a nut isn't it to kind of
go directly to the ground not have to get trampled in because that's what you want to be in the end
yeah absolutely yeah if you're a verb that must be terrifying if you're one going through the soil
and suddenly these like daggers are coming down I mean they're great lacing your friend in half
and now you've got two friends that says quite nice the only species we're watching your
friend be cut in half it's quite nice got the one French revolution would have been really weird
we've doubled the aristocrats the word James Bond where the laser comes down it just cuts
if it's a two James Bond snowmessers Bond okay there's time for fact number two and that is Anna
my fact this week is that the man who worked out how to stop soft cheese going moldy came from a place
called mold so I know just before this we started recording we asked it saying that it's pronounced
mold yeah mold yeah I think I said mold so it's a phrase called mold it's in Norway and you
you you sort of say it molder but it's still got the word molding it I mean it is still quite
amazing this is a great fact written down yeah it looks pretty good if as long as you spell moldy
American way so if you're reading this podcast then great so this was a Norwegian cheese make he
was called Olaf Cavley and yeah he grew up in this municipality in Norway and he was actually
really old when he invented Primula which is that do you laugh because I pronounce it old not
older he ended up inventing Primula which is you know that cheese that you see that comes in a
squeezy tube I think it probably is pronounced Primula and in fact it's named after Primrose's because
he thought the beautiful yellow color was reminded him of the beautiful yellow of yellow Primrose
so Primula makes a lot more sense anyway yeah he discovered this and then he got really rich and he
I quite like this because it gives us all hope for our future later years of being finally successful
rather hanging out with you dogs because he was in his 60s when he came up with this he just ran
this delicatessen I mean it's not good for your next 30 years I'm out of his head 30 years of
hanging around with those dogs it's so nice to invent some cheese yeah right I'm not going to
last that long he actually lived to a hundred lived in 1958 and also a good thing to know about
Primula and I'm actually going to start buying it is that all well know that you can pronounce it
but all the profits go to charity go to causes because he was a massive philanthropist and then his
son was and didn't have any offspring and so set up the company which is the I think it's called
the Cavalry Trust and it's legally required to donate all its profits to scientific humanitarian
wow wow cool but yeah cheese and stopping cheese going moldy it's been a problem for centuries
that just on the place called molder mold it's name comes from the word mold without any on the end
it's a plural form of that place and the word mold in Norwegian means either fertile soil
skull or mold it might actually it might actually be mold so that I was looking up moldy
cheeses or soft cheeses so there's a cheese called kuga gold which is made in Washington state
university and this is really weird so it's canned soft cheese but it the it's canned when it's
still in the curd form so it develops as it ages as in it's not once it's gone into the
can it doesn't stay the same yeah wow so the lactic acid bacteria inside they don't need oxygen
so the flavor keeps developing and there are fans who age their cans for years and years before
opening them and it's just curts I think it goes in as curd no way nobody yeah no yes it was too good
I just had to sit back in them and just stare in awe I can now looking back when you said 30 more
years I said I'm done yeah that's that's really cool so there's no use by date on it presumably I
maybe there is for safety is then maybe after a certain number of years it does go off but I'm not sure
so when process cheese came about which this is an example of then it was very controversial
because it threatened the normal cheese market and there were actually a lot of cheese makers in
America who said it should be called embalmed cheese which it was almost named but I hadn't quite
realized that it's just a blend of lots of other cheeses which I think most people will but like
off-cuts of the cheese-making process so for instance I think American cheese you know your classic
American process cheese is a combination of bits of cheddar, colby, provolone, things like that
and they're credible and then they add sodium phosphate which kind of makes it all go
goopy yeah and that but quite easy to slice and that was invented American cheese by Canadian
of course who is James Lewis Kraft of Kraft fame Kraft cheese yeah he was a Canadian and he kind of
came up with this idea of kind of shredding it and then adding this stuff which makes it kind of
cutable yeah so it's kind of a Franken cheese yeah and they pasteurise it so it doesn't ripen so
it's not it's really not proper cheese as we the French might know it by the time it's been
so for instance Belvita has to be called pasteurised prepared cheese product it does did you know
that's only since the early 90s which is when they finally worked out a way to make the base not
real cheese at Kraft so it was a really exciting moment because instead of like using just this
mixture of cheese and then adding this sodium phosphate and stuff they worked out way of cracking milk
which I didn't know was a thing but basically this is you add little bits of plastic membrane into
milk and it causes all the milk particles to separate and it separates out into its milk protein lumps
and the mix is kind of concentrated protein and that can be the base for their cheese and it was at
that moment when some inspectors went around their factories and they weren't guys you're not using
cheese anymore I'm afraid you have to call it cheese products how do they come up with this
shit yeah so is I always think the other day I found out this is completely off topic but early
cars had white tires right and the only reason that we have tires that are black is because you add
something called I think it's called black carbon which is just this tiny bit of weird carbon that
they manage to get from their industrial process and they just like let's just try it with rubber
and it turned out to make rubber 10,000 times more solid than normal but even on that I was like how
do you even think of that yeah and they just trying everything or what I can't believe early cars had
white tires that's not so cool but an absolute nightmare to keep clean it's actually you would just
naturally have a black tire after a week yeah it'd be as dirty as the devil's nuts at me
sorry I just checked nutting bag
don't embarrass yourself in Birmingham am I getting that wrong I'm just thinking the difference
between your brain and mind jabs is that you're fascinated by the fact that all these processes go on
and I'm still busy here going wow there was an actual guy called craft so I looked off a bit
about food preservation have we I don't think we've spoken before about Nicholas Apert or Apert
so he was the man who started preserving foods by heating it a lot and then putting in an airtight
container so this was in the Napoleonic Wars and there was a massive price on offer from the French
army to anyone who could work out how to safely preserve food and keep it for a long period of time
because it couldn't be done and he invented it and it was called appetization he and he put all
his food in glass jars in fact not in tins so he won the prize and it was decades before microbe
theory so he had invented safe food storage but he didn't know how it worked so good on that happens
yeah and then later on there was a British innovator called Peter Durend and he invented giant tins
so you know how you have a normal tin of beans or something it's a normal size he was keen to
scale up for the Royal Navy and he stored up to 30 and a half kilos of meat in a single can
I'm already going to go on the limb and say that's not an invention
making a much much bigger version of something is already I couldn't I couldn't invent the giant
book yeah exactly well not with that attitude yeah no we're talking about a Guinness World Record
attempt aren't we think of it it's a giant it's a it's a it's a quarter of a person's size oh my god
and he's showing us how big it is with his hands he's right it's an invention
okay innovator he innovated it's very impressive though wasn't he the same guy
wasn't this the one where it was like 30 years until they invented something to a specific tin
opener didn't they yeah so in the Napoleon it was they all used their what those instruments
called bananas yeah another name thing I came across I was looking up some cheese studies
and there was a cheese study in the encyclopedia of food sciences and nutrition that was published
in 2003 it was called cheeses colon processed cheese and the author was called a gooder
no no yeah yeah what an unusual surname if you're surprised that there was a person called
craft I know but I think you'd be biased if you were called gooder a proper cheese I'm not sure
I would trust you to write a balanced article about process oh yeah you're right you know it's
like being called baby bell and writing about the cheddar industry that is named after a guy called
bell isn't it isn't it so I think the laughing cow company was founded by the bell brothers or
maybe it was a father and son the surname was BEL so I think baby bell is named after a guy as well
that's awesome at one point would have been a baby yeah so would the father actually yeah
and the thing about laughing cow by the way which I did see is I went on the website and they have one
top secret technology there that they've never given away to anyone else okay do you know what that is
oh how to uh no so it's a couple of triangles is it folding the foil kind of yes is it the red
thing how you get the red thing to peel off so hopefully it's the easy open foil wrapping technology
which according to the website remains top secret to this day wow uh yeah it's not a
technology that we're crying out that would be so useful that would be so useful for so many years
yeah imagine if you had it for your clothes and whenever you needed to get undressed at the night
you start to pull one red string you start completely undressed you've got that it's easy
strip strip shows would be a lot shorter wouldn't there if there was one baby bells i'll peel off thing
i found a weird thing about cheese humans invented cheese before they could digest milk
okay what yeah okay so so all mammals you know they're lactose tolerant when they're very young
because they're they're drinking their mother's milk and then all mammals are lactose intolerant
you're almost all though and then humans only got the genetic mutation to
to allow them to drink milk as adults a few thousand years ago but so we we couldn't digest lactose
but cheese has much lower lactose than milk so if you make cheese you can store all the calories
of the animal's milk in cheese form and that means you can keep the calories for longer so you'll
survive longer so that gives you a reason to keep animals for longer rather than immediately
killing them or hunting them so that means that you domesticate cheap and cows and all of this and
you make cheese but you don't drink the milk but the thing is like to make the cheese
is this not right that what you do is you get the milk and then you get the stomach of a dead animal
and you put the milk inside the stomach because it's got acid which you need and then you leave it
for weeks and weeks and weeks and then you eat it yeah i mean Adam was talking about
things not being invented that is an invention half isn't it it is one of those things that
required them to be incredibly bored and wouldn't be able to be invented now because we've
all got better things to do than experiment with these bizarre things and the ancient Greeks used
a great goat's cheese into their beer and wine one of the earliest wines actually the kind of
peasant wine mentioned by Homer is actually wine and goat cheese which we could try and bring back
i mean what would it taste like in cheese yeah why the cheese together but not one inside the other
out of pasta you know what out of pasta you've got it you've got to hold a plate and you've got to
hold a glass and it's really difficult if you need to use it you have a gesture yeah if you just put
the cheese in the wine yeah i'm going to try that this Christmas who these are the Greeks or the
Romans. The ancient Greeks. Do you think as I came here they was think we were really pretentious
because you know if you go to some really post restaurants and they have deconstructed ex why is
that like you have a deconstructed crumble where the crumbles on one side and do you know what i mean
yeah well that yeah they'd come and say fucking deconstructed wine cheese drink wine on one side and
cheese on the other. Okay it's time for fact number three and that is Andy my
fact is that when Charles Darwin submitted on the origin of species to his publisher the publisher
suggested he should rewrite it exclusively about pigeons. So I know so there's there's this article
in the London Review of Books which is reviewing a book all about the publisher John Murray and the
correspondence between authors and the publishers over centuries so it's got all these famous authors
like Jane Austen and Lord Byron and David Livingstone and all these people and the firm sent on the
origin of species out to two readers when it came in but one of them was a lawyer called George Pollock
who said that it was beyond the apprehension of any living scientist and the other was this guy
he called Wittwell Elwin who was a clergyman and he wrote back saying look I like Darwin but
it's a wild and foolish piece of imagination and that it would really be a good book if you just
write it about pigeons because he said everybody is interested in pigeons. So did when Elwin then
Elwin sorry spoke to Murray right did Murray then go back to Darwin and say write it about pigeons
that's what I couldn't work out or was it just a internal email kind of thing I don't know I don't
know whether it got passed on to Darwin yeah but that that wouldn't involve ripping the whole thing
to pieces because there's quite a lot of pigeon in there it's just a shutter book yeah it's a very
slight edit he was he was really into pigeons though I hadn't quite realised how much of a pigeon
fancier he was so he might have been flattered that his pigeon work was so inspiring he was a member
of two London pigeon clubs two one's not enough your wife would be a bit annoyed wouldn't she you're
spending your time at one pigeon club yeah the thing is with the pigeons like he was it was a bit
like breeding dogs wasn't it like the pigeons were really weird looking like they they bred them
to look not like pigeons yeah so they didn't look like the pigeons you see yeah yeah so like breeds
that he worked on included the pygmy powder pigeon the Polish helmet pigeon the English long faced
muffin tumbler classic if you look at these pictures yeah if you google them they don't look like
pigeons at all there's one the English carrier pigeon which you don't see anymore it looks almost
identical to jacobry smog does it really really does like honestly if you google it it just looks
like jacobry spot you should put a picture on Twitter yeah because they're extinct aren't they so
maybe he's actually the one surviving member of the species we need to start breeding him he's breeding
glasses because there were these ones called powders which are really weird because they
bred them to grow this the bizarre birds because they it looks like it's fallen a bowling ball
basically it's got this huge they've got this huge lump under their under their chins as it were
in their neck it's really strange well I find it weird that we're so used to are just very
standard pigeons when there aren't there is this huge variety so if you go to pigeon contest and
pigeon beauty patterns which you can they're quite big to the middle east in fact then they look almost
nothing like pigeons a lot of them have that kind of gross turkey like red bulbous stuff around
their eyes but yeah it's a very popular thing I think they've been big in the middle east since 1150
when the first pigeon post service was set up in Baghdad and it took messages from Baghdad to Syria
and by the 1160s then it was you know it was constantly taking messages back and forth to the
extent that in the crusades the Christians brought loads of falcons over with them to try and intercept
the pigeon post in the middle east so they were the first hackers who would grab their messages
they also used to do a lot of homing pigeon races which still go on to this day but that's been going
since the 1800s and I was reading about one in China that happened very recently and it's a huge
prize for this it's a big deal in China so 160,000 American dollars would be the prize for the
winning homing pigeon so they get sent a hundred miles away and they have to fly back to this spot
and the fastest speed that a homing pigeon has ever done is it go they go about a hundred miles
an hour what yeah but no way this is the this is clock speeds faster than a hundred miles an hour
but the ones that won would have had to have gone 200 miles an hour the first four places and they
couldn't work out how that was possible and it turns out what it was is the owners of the pigeons
had them fly off but immediately come back hopped on a bullet train which can go 200 miles an hour
get to the other side and release them and and they won but they have been caught and sent to prison
I think that's I think that's such a silly cheat because you will be caught because pigeons don't fly
200 miles that's exactly did you say they got sent to prison not the pigeons the humans still
well it's a huge prize isn't it it's a 160,000 dollars so that's yeah yeah they go for a lot I think
Chinese guy recently bought one for half a million dollars American dollars yeah they go for a huge amount
I should say they were sentenced to three years but it was a suspended sentence so if another crime
occurs then they go to prison do it again have you guys heard of the Spanish sport which is called
it's thieving it's a pigeon thieving competition no no this is amazing so it's basically pigeon love
island you get you you're a pigeon fancier and you have a male so half a dozen men each bring
a male pigeon and they paint them in bright colors to mark which one is theirs and then
there's a marked female and the male pigeons all compete to seduce the female and the aim is
to get them to come home with them because this is a very unusual pigeon it's called the horseman
thief powder and it unusually it makes by bringing it's made back to its place for sex and so
how do you know that they're all fancy her though um I think cold pigeons just all fancy all other
pigeons they are actually quite roundly aren't they're not these ones are not choosy yeah and so
the owner wins if um his male is the one who wins the seduction competition with the female yeah
that's amazing a little strut around and they you know they dance and they do little that's some
that was some excellent pigeon strutting that and this happens in Scotland too it's called um do
basically the pigeons are called doos d double o and if you if you see a pigeon flying up and you
know that one of your rival doom and has released their pigeon you release your pigeon of the opposite
sex and then there's this battle in the skies over who goes back to whose place and if you and if
the pigeon comes back to your place you get to keep both pigeons it must be confusing because they're
completely painted right so that's almost the equivalent human wise of going to a Halloween party
and fancying someone who's just come as a skeleton but but you get on well and then the next morning
and you're like oh you put them away pigeons were the first drones in a way weren't they or some of
the first drones in that there was in 1907 this guy called dr. Julius Nurbronner uh which I will
have pronounced incorrectly sorry but he was a German apothecary and he invented the pigeon camera
and this was a very exciting adventure at the time it was thought to be quite revolutionary because
a couple of cameras have been sent up on balloons and stuff but this was really acting like a proper
drone so he'd strap it like a backpack onto the pigeon's chest like a chest pack and send them off
to fly fly through the air and they took amazing aerial photographs it's so worth looking at them they
are like beautiful pictures and I hadn't really considered that for most people seeing those was
bizarre because they've never seen pictures taken from above oh yeah there's a whole school of
first world war artists which or post first world war art which is derived from aerial photography
and aerial landscapes because it just wasn't a I guess you saw maps but you could see it from the
top of the hill or something but in fact from that you'd never you'd never be able to see a city
from a bunch of you yeah yeah exactly he also actually invented a horse drawn dove cut you know a
home for the pigeons and doves that he was trapping the cameras to and dark room which is quite
cool to go with the pigeon cameras so that when you thought I suddenly want to photograph this city
you'd take your whole horse drawn dove cut and dark room inside to where it was and then you could
send them off just one last quick thing on Darwin maybe you guys all knew this but I didn't realize
that in the origin of the species in the sick edition he added a new chapter which was responding
to all the criticisms from previous editions of his book oh really I think that's such a good idea
that's a great idea nice great we should do that with the book of the year yeah I think you'll find
the wasp article is funny how many people wrote in saying not enough pigeons did you have
I just have one last thing it's not great but I'll mention it anyway oh yeah
buckle up this is just a fact on publishers getting it wrong so in this fact it's the pigeon suggestion
this has just happened in Australia there's a business woman and socialite called Roxy Jacenco
and she's just released a book now she's a she's very famous as a PR specialist and she was on
celebrity apprentice in Australia so she's a she's a big name there and so the book is described
as a no bullshit guide to PR social media and building your brand and it had all these glowing
reviews on it being street smart and hard-headed totally tenacious PR expert but they've had to
pulp every single one of the copies of the book because it also included as a result of the publisher's
mistake a quote that was a misquote that said on the front that the book never fails to disappoint
so medsay never fails to deliver but yeah total PR disaster
time for our final fact of the show and that's my fact my fact this week is that King Louis the 13th
of France had a royal anagramist wow yeah this was like you know you'd have a court jester
and then you would also have your royal anagramist who would just be there ready to make anagrams
for the amusement of the king that that really was the role um he uh he did a number of things with
anagrams it wasn't just a musing name uh remixes it was uh he used to do prophecies as well using anagrams
and yeah so it had a lot of had a lot of mystical purposes as well as I wonder if he could make an
anagram of Louis the 13 because there's an X and three eyes in there yeah it's pretty so fun if
you can do that he deserves a gel you get six I've got the word six there from Louis and then the X
and then you've got L.O.U and there's three eyes you've got we in French yeah six L.I.I
I always I'm really bad at doing anagrams because I always end up with spare elites means uh or
in Russian the Romans supposedly there's a there's a thing called ars magna the great art and supposedly
the Romans called anagraming ars magna which is an anagram of the word anagrams but I don't
think they used I don't think they knew the word anagrams because they didn't have a plural form
like which just adds an S to the main noun normally there are a few weird ones where it does but
anyway I don't think that is true but it does come from the Greek anagrama design from anna which
means backwards a grammar which means letter so it's putting the letters backwards anna with one end
though guys not the two ends which is which means excellent anna meaning backwards considering
that anna is a palindrome it's quite weird isn't it yeah that is weird anyway so what about this guy
who was he oh so yeah so we're talking the 1600s here this is one King Louis the 13th reigned um
and this person um I don't actually know if he had a number of them uh but the one person you
can find who definitely was one of his royal anagrams was Thomas Billon so he lived from 1617 to
1647 and he served as the royal anagramist twice so there's a suggestion that there might have been
another person fulfilling the role in between actually there was a royal sudoku guy in between
so he did it from 1624 to 1631 and then from 1640 till his death I guess in 1647 maybe he was
fired in 31 because he had a leftover letter or something but he also he predicted people's characters
so he would rearrange the letters of your name and if it came out as being you know an evil phrase
then people would think badly of you do you think as a parent if you were having a new child
you would deliberately come up with a good word like an anagram of you call your child like an
anagram of awesome yes yeah you were trying trick it I'm a soury no we're soury yes this is something
that I think we might have mentioned on qi and one of our researchers found the other day again
but that during the whole enlightenment anagrams was something that fascinated people they were
thought to pull ten certain things like you say if your name could spell something bad but also
they were used by lots of scientists as a way of concealing their discoveries whilst also kind of
stamping them as their own so people like Galileo and a robot hook would record their initial results
as an anagram and send it off when they hadn't actually confirmed their results yet because that
meant once they confirmed the results they could say look I did it first look here's the anagram
proof it's like blockchain I imagine even though I don't really know what blockchain is
many of them I imagine it is too but the the anagrams were exceptionally poor weren't they
were they yeah so christian hygans he discovered the rings around Saturn and he wanted an anagram
um so he wanted to anagram anuto singitor tenuay pleno nusquam coherente ad ecliptam
inclinato which means it is surrounded by a thin flat ring nowhere touching inclined to the
elliptic so he wanted to make that okay his anagram was a a a a a a a a c c c c c c d e e e e e e g h
he basically put all the letters in help yeah that's a good even trying it's not even trying that's
ready that's right yeah that's not an anagram is it that's like the well we said a few weeks ago the
crosswords answers in that to be actual words yeah the anagram has to be an actual word christian
god that was an easy job then if that's all you had to do random things well there are kind of
different types of anagram this is according to a book was reading for about a hundred years ago
I think which is saying you get a synagram which is kind of like that but a synagram is an anagram
where the anagram means the same sort of thing so vial is a synagram of evil or anger'd have
been raged eleven plus two and twelve plus one is that one blows my yeah so yeah every time it's
always yeah always a winner but imagine if you thought that there were hidden things in anagrams
you would use those as examples of like yeah look at look how connected the universe is when we
reshuffle this stuff I would have bought into that immediately great there's a website called
anagrammy dot com which has a monthly award so the archbishop of canterbury is another church
it's type of rabbi mmm nice um the amateur thespians is an anagram of in apt hams use theater
really like and do they do they release of a something they want an anagram made of or you
just submitting I think you submit your own right okay and they pick a really good one each month
so they're synagrams they're synagrams and then you get anti-grams which are the ones that
mean the opposite uh so like diplomacy is mad policy there's a Guinness World record for the
longest anagram that you can get in the English language and this this is for a non-scientific
English word because in the scientific ones they they're pretty bizarre so in a non-scientific word
I have known that in the past but I can't remember it now okay so I'll give you I'll give you
the the original word and see if you can make the anagram so conversationalists oh yeah
what is the anagram a conservationist yeah oh that's a cheat I think you should have to rearrange
at least four letters yeah it's making up rules on the fly yeah I'm allowed yeah it is a bit
bit measly isn't it what about scone and cones yeah so that's currently the record no
what is why is that not good enough I think they should have to begin with a different letter
scone and cones yeah yeah okay I'll accept scone and cones but I'm not with that right off the
bat like just did you yeah I didn't even have to think about have you heard of Corey Kell Hoon
nope he's an anagrammer I don't think he's a pro but he's bad as close as the modern age gets to
a pro anagrammer so he rearranged the first line of hamlets soliloquy to come up with a summary
of hamlet so as in just to be or not to be no let's see if it passes the anotest for crazy
anagram so to be or not to be that is the question whether it is nobler in the mind to suffer the
slings and arrows of outrageous fortune okay that he rearranged to make in one of the bar's best
thought of tragedies our insistent hero hamlet queries on two fronts about how life turns rotten
that's very good that's really nice so good there's another thing that gets done where these
kind of big challenges where people try to take complete texts and create an anagram that works
so that it just works as a whole separate work if that makes sense so the biggest one that's ever
been completed is a guy called Mike Keith has anagrammed the complete text of Moby Dick so that's
yeah nine hundred thirty five thousand seven hundred and sixty three letters and he used a computer
to do this so that's seen as a cheat yeah but there was a person who did do it all by himself which
was Richard Brody and he made an anagram of battle of the books by Jonathan Swift and that's 42,000
letters 142,177 letters but how much of a different anagram does it be could you have the exact
same book but it just call me maleish so the the ancient Greeks had this is kind of related so it's
about palindromes not anagrams but Greek fountains had a big palindrome written on them which said
nispon anominata mi mon an obsin so that's exactly the same backwards as it is forwards and it means
wash the sin as well as the face that's a good one that's cool for a fountain yeah very good I do
know what the lung is palindrome in the English language it's gone it's redevider
redevider oh cool just a fact that's good fact did you guys know the Dutch national anthem
is an acrostic as in the first letter of each word spell something out the first letter of each line
spell something out so the first letter of sorry the first letter of each of the 15 verses
spells out William Van Nassau as in William of Orange's name because and it's sung from his
perspective so it's all in the first person bizarrely when you're Dutch you all sing as if
you're William of Orange when you sing the anthem isn't there a line where he kind of says and I
give everything to the king of Spain in that I think there is yeah so good yeah how weird and they
were trying to change it I think but now you can't really otherwise the acrostic won't work doesn't work
yeah it's covered there was a guy called Andre Pujon and this was back in the day when everyone
thought that anagrams were really important and they had some kind of spiritual thing behind them
he worked out that his name was an anagram of Pondu de Ron which means hanged in Ron and so
he decided to fulfill his destiny by traveling to the town of Ron and committing criminal offence
which meant that he was hanged wow um so he actually you know made sure that the omen happened
right oh poor guy oh no silly silly man there could have been there could have been another
ionagram he might have found where it said had a relaxing holiday somewhere else yeah yeah I mean
it probably is just a story isn't it but it is a story that exists and that's the bar we've decided
um so there's an anagram thinking our book as well in the book of the year there's a there's
a thing about Banksy because he submitted an artwork to the Royal Academy under the name Brian
S. Garkman which is an anagram of the words Banksy Anagram and they did not spot it they rejected it
and then they asked him can he submit a work they just got in touch with the banks he said
can you submit a work of art and he sent them the thing that they had already rejected and they
accepted it would they have been expected to spot an anagram do people actually have an anagram
pass over everything that's submitted this is an anagram of mobility nice try buddy supposedly if you
are asked to solve anagrams against a green background and then against a red background you'll
do worse on the red background really this has been tried and um the people who were exposed
to the red background anagrams did substantially worse is that because the text was in red on both
times black text um sorry so is that sorry i misunderstood so it's um there's a piece of paper
that is red yes right and it's got anagram it's got anagrams in black that need to be solved
as black as the devil's nut sack it's not it's it's the devil's nutting bag no the language is
evolved at this point it's a nut sack there was another paper that suggests that it's easier to
solve anagrams while you're laying down rather than standing up right no yeah i think that's true
because there's more blood flow in your head because this the red green thing is crazy it suggests
that if you do worse on the red that you're sensitive to the queue of danger you think the
sound of grams are dangerous you know it must be just that you can't see black on red as well as
you can see no it's not i tried it and actually i did better on the ones with the red background
that the green ones so i would have been an anomaly you're so brave does that mean you should
need us all into war i'm now a general idiot okay that's it that is all of our facts thank you so
much for listening if you'd like to get in contact with any of us about the things that we
have said over the course of this podcast we can be found on our twitter accounts i'm on at
Shriberland james at james harkin andy and jazinski you can email podcast at qi.com or you can go to
our website no such thing as a fish.com we have everything up there from links to our upcoming tour
all of our previous episodes as well as links to buying our book book of the year 2018 do please buy it
okay we'll be back again next week with another episode we'll see you then goodbye
you